Ayurveda is said to be
at least 5,000 years old.
It's a very, very
old system.
It's still functioning
and it's still refining.
The vedic sciences are really
about prolonging life they go in
part with Ayurveda is for the
body, we also have yoga for the
spirit and we have
tantra for the mind.
All of these are focusing on
balance, peace and harmony.
Ayurveda, the science of health
and longevity
is the ancient
healing system of India.
♪♪  Music  ♪♪
Much like Chinese
medicine and other forms of
traditional healing, it can be
traced back thousands of years.
These systems see the body as a
complete garden and not simply a
machine made of parts.
Like the rest of nature the
body is comprised of the primary
elements of water,
air, earth and fire.
All of these elements are
interacting within the element
of ether or space.
Each element is interwoven with
the functioning of the body, the
mind and their many
processes or states.
According to Ayurveda, the
science of health and longevity,
we are all a unique balance
of these elements which they
categorize into
three types or doshas.
Depending on our dosha type.
We will be dominated by fire and
water known as pitta, earth and
water known as kapha or
air and ether known as vata.
Everything in nature, including
different plants will fall into
these same categories.
Each category or elemental
nature a plant represents and
thus its effect on the body
can be categorized by its taste,
color and smell.
For example, vata can be
recognized in the bitter flavor,
pitta in the pungent
and kapha in the sweet.
Where we live, our sleeping
patterns, hobbies, diet,
vocations, emotions and so on
all affect our dosha balance.
The goal in traditional medicine
is to find elemental harmony or
constitutional balance
and thus avoid disease.
If a garden gets moldy or
overtaken by a fungus due to its
lack of drainage or excess water
element, or its lack of exposure
to wind and sun, it will do
little good to spray a chemical
on it.
One must look at the balance
of the elements, which one is
lacking and which
one is in excess.
Traditional systems seek to
balance the body and mind via
diet, herbs and lifestyle
using the same ancient system of
elements.
Each element can be used
to balance the others.
This is a holistic system
that embraces the micro and the
macro, the
environment and the individual.
So one of the old time
herbalists, by the name of
Culpeper spoke about a plant,
named Rosemary as a
way to bring in warmth in any
coldness disease.
Now, we have to remember that
the digestive function, the
stomach, the fire in the stomach
is really our first line of
defense and it's also what
makes sure that we're properly
breaking down food and that the
damp-warm conditions of body do
not get overtaken by yeast
and sort of flem and mucus and
become really hospitable to
let's say parasites and harmful
bacteria.
So, when we're talking about
bringing warmth, rosemary is one
of the best herbs that
we can use for that.
Rosemary helps to cleanse the
liver out and increase the flow
of bile through the liver which
of course helps in digestion.
But it also as we know has an
incredibly antiseptic property.
This used to be burned as smudge
during times like the plague or
in hospitals to cleanse the air.
It's used to, what Culpeper
says to bring brightness where
there's dull sight.
Now the sight is closely related
to the Agni function in Ayurveda
or fire element.
Now if we get too much dampness,
yeast or overgrowth conditions
in the body, we
start to lose that Agni.
So it's very important that we
use plants like rosemary in our
cooking along with many others
like oregano, thyme, ginger or
allspice.
These are all very helpful
for bringing that warmth to the
digestive function.
This plant happens to also be
used for clearing the mind and
is said to be the one that is
used in ancient Greece where you
see the wreaths
around people's hair.
It brings circulation to the
brain and there are studies that
it stimulates certain areas
of the brain that may really
benefit in conditions like ADD.
But again, even though we're
talking about digestion and
immunity, we're also talking
about clarity of mind because if
the Agni or digestive fire is
not strong, we run into dampness
conditions from sinus
infections to foggy mind.
So these things like rosemary,
these herbs that bring that
strong digestive ability,
keep the blood clean as a result
because if the food is not
digesting properly, then we end
up with putrefying food
instead of digesting food.
Other herbs that are used
that way for example are this
Artemisia or wormwood.
This is named after the
goddess of the moon, Artemisia.
Now, interestingly enough, this
is used in most anti parasitic
formulas.
There are many who believe
parasites are the main cause of
many of our serious
degenerative diseases.
Most people have parasites,
it's to what degree your immune
system has to
constantly keep things in check.
Herbs like Artemisia or wormwood
are used to fight parasites and
also to increase digestive
function and fight off dampness
or yeast conditions in the body.
So, interestingly enough, this
herb being named after Artemisia
the goddess of the moon, it's
said that parasites mainly breed
or multiply and have the largest
effect on the body and on the
personality
during the full moon.
And if you talk to anyone who
works in an emergency room, they
will testify to that.
So there's an interesting
connection there, definitely a
fascinating plant.
If you taste this, this is
by far one of the most bitter
plants that we have available.
So it is an apparatif, it does
get the stomach juices flowing,
the hydrochloric acid is one
of our best defenses against
candida, yeast and all
kinds of digestive over growth
conditions.
So this bitter flavor remember
is like blowing on a fire, the
fire being the digestive system.
Bitter is air and so what we're
doing when chew this before we
eat is bringing in
the air element.
Now if we add to that good
proper traditional ferments and
foods that are high in
beneficial bacteria and then
we're getting in our
glyconutrients, we're really in
a good position to not have a
stressed out immune function.
So, another plant that I'd like
to talk about on this topic is
calamus also
known as sweet flag.
Now the number of uses for this
plant are phenomenal but it is
in a lot of digestive formulas.
Around the world you'll hear
about Swedish bitters, or you'll
hear about Canadian
bitters, Chinese bitters.
Bitters get the digestive
function going, they fight
dampness, yeast, fungal
conditions in the body so
calamus is used for everything
from sinus infections, poor
digestion, diabetes, fungal
overgrowth, this is also used to
sharpen the mind so again we
see that connection between the
digestive fire and a clear
system that when food is
digesting properly and the body
is not bogged by yeast and other
pathogens.
Calamus, if you look at it, it
also looks like a brain stem.
This is one of the ways we can
also consider the doctrine of
signatures.
It's a major
rejuvenative for the mind.
So all of these plants, we
have to consider when we're
considering the immune system.
The immune system and the
digestive system go hand in
hand, it's very dynamic.
This is the purpose of
cleansing, this is the purpose
of taking glyconutrients,
roots, and mushrooms.
We keep immune system high but
we also have to make sure we
have the right amount of
hydrochloric acid, bile moving
enzymes because we're eating
live foods, we're not eating
foods designed for shelf life.
All of those things are what
create a good immune system.
If we add in mediation and
exercise, now we're talking and
together we have a more holistic
perspective of which herbs are
an essential part.
♪♪ Music ♪♪
Here we are with
verbascum thapsus also known as
mullein, commonly known as
rabbits' ear for how soft its
leaves are.
From feeling the leaves and
the flower, you immediately
understand how incredibly
soothing this plant is.
It's very comforting and also by
noticing where it grows, you can
tell it really likes flow.
It likes the flow of water, and
that's exactly what it's used
for, both of those reasons.
It decreases stagnation in the
lungs, so in the lungs it's used
as an expectorant when there's
lung congestion, it's also very
soothing to lung tissue.
In the lymphatic system, it also
moves congested lymph as well.
Lymph, when we're talking about
the lymphatic system, it's not
just a physical thing, it's
connected to the heart, there's
no pump for the lymphatic
system, it's connected to the
emotions.
So mullein's not just working
on a physical level, it's also
helping on an emotional level.
The flowers are used along
with calendula which is an
anti-inflammatory as well as
garlic and olive oil and St.
John's Wort which is an anti-
inflammatory and anti-viral.
Both of those are anti-virals.
Together, all of those
things and an ear oil are highly
affective for ear
infections and ear aches.
I've used it for many
years now very successfully.
So when I think about plants
that help move lung congestion
or address lung issues we
immediately think of other herbs
like licorice which is one of
the most incredible herbs in the
planet.
It cleanses all 12 meridians in
the body, it's very soothing,
and it's a natural
alternative to steroidal drugs.
Another incredible natural
alternative to steroidal drugs
people might know more from
legend and from church is
frankincense.
Frankincense is also
known as boswellia.
Boswellia is an incredible
anti-inflammatory for all kinds
of conditions.
We're talking about IBS
condition, Crohn's, colitis,
we're talking about inflammatory
conditions like asthma.
This will work when we're
addressing inflammation in the
body of all kinds whether
it's osteoarthritis rheumatoid
arthritis, asthma,
IBS as I mentioned.
But, when we're talking about
inflammation and we're talking
about allergies, IBS and asthma,
we have to talk about emotions
because all of the pent up
emotional energy creates heated
internal responses, overactive
systems to food allergens, to
things that would not normally
bother the digestive tract or
the respiratory tract so a lot
of people find their issues get
worse with stress.
They're suddenly responding
to lectins in the food very
negatively, to gluten, to dairy,
to things that they wouldn't
normally have problems with.
So when we're looking at
addressing these kinds of
issues, we're looking at
not just how do we calm the
inflammation but we're also
looking at how do we calm the
emotions, how do we vent
emotions, how do we address flow
in the body because we're also
looking at keeping the blood
clean, if we're trying to avoid
arthritis, if we're trying to
have a good digestive system,
we're talking about all of those
things around digestive
tonics that we covered.
So this is a holistic concept
again, mullein is an incredible
ally that we can call upon,
these fuzzy rabbit's ears are
found all over the wild and
they're free and they're willing
to help and they're
definitely a give of nature.
♪♪ Music ♪♪
I know you've
written books on mind body
medicine and one of the things
that I really find fascinating
and I see with my clients is a
lot of people who are living in
their heads and not really
knowing how to manage the stress
they're experiencing ending
up with auto immune problems.
Absolutely, it's increasing
more auto immune diseases.
It used to be considered an
anomaly for a person to have
more than one
auto immune disease.
In the last couple of years,
I've had several patients that
have had more than one which
is theoretically impossible.
But I still think the number one
major thing is personal stresses
and how a person
addresses themselves.
In our society, we're taught
mentally but we're only taught a
little bit physical and
we're not trained emotionally.
So those emotional stresses are
still the things that I think
are driving the auto
immune things the most.
If you want to go back to the
grassroots, still the number one
most important
thing is meditation.
Again, my base herb would
definitely be the mushrooms,
because the mushrooms especially
reishi in this case, because
reishi literally...
there's a whole classification
of medicine in Chinese medicine
to protect an academic from
their own brain when they think
too much and reishi is kind of
the king or that, kind of the
emperor of that if you want.
So we have talked
about a lot of herbs thus far
and I would like to talk
about a very special mushroom.
Here in this clinic, we use
this probably more than other
medicine and it is
reishi mushroom.
While chaga mushroom is
considered the king of the herbs
of Siberia, reishi mushroom is
truly the king of herbs of Asia.
This plant as you can see by
looking at it according to the
doctrine of signatures is
really good for the heart.
Reishi mushroom can be used for
high blood pressure, cholesterol
but is also used for all
kinds of stress and hyperactive
conditions.
You may consider that an
overactive mind so it's said to
save the academic from their
mind or people who are too much
in their brains, insomniacs who
can't stop thinking, paranoia,
it's used...
very valuable in that situation.
It's also considered to be
calming to central nervous
system.
This mushroom is one of our best
allies for calming over active
vata or air element.
Now, there being a lot of nerve
impulses and mental activity,
it's really important to realize
that mushrooms are closer in DNA
structure to animals
than they are to plants.
Another fascinating thing is
that if you could see below this
fruiting body into the earth,
mushrooms have a whole network
of mycelium and those mycelium
have the same sort of pattern in
nature as our neural net in our
own brains, and even the
dark matter in space,
so it's really
interesting to see these
patterns in nature repeating
themselves over and over again.
So reishi is considered to be
not only grounding and calming
but it can be used in such
situations as cancer, it can be
used in all kinds of infections.
So if you have overactive immune
system, it will calm it down and
if you have an underactive
immune system, it will raise it
up.
That's thought to be due to the
water soluble polysaccharides in
reishi mushroom.
We usually use this as a
tincture here at the clinic
which is really effective,
generally starting at a low dose
because it really is a great
detoxifier that really helps the
liver do its job.
Research on it suggests that it
helps the body's production of
superoxide dismutase or
SOD which is one of our main
antioxidants and detoxifiers of
the body, helps us break down
and get rid of all kinds of
things like pesticides from
the environment for example.
So the reishi can also be used
in a tea, traditionally it was
made into a decoction but
it's used for also an adaptogen.
Adaptogen is a crucial word
for us in this time because it's
really helping people to resist
stress, not only emotional
stress, but also environmental
stress, long term functioning
under a lot of pressure.
It modulates the adrenal
function so it can be used not
only for fighting infections but
also for generally strengthening
people.
When you look at such texts as
Terry Willard's text book which
is a wonderful text from
Wild Rose, you'll see that the
Chinese character for reishi
mushroom is deep forest, three
months of rain
Shaman special mushroom.
So, what that's telling you is
that it has this sort of quality
that was not only used for
physical health which is
obviously very important, but it
has a mystical quality as well
that you can see in some of
its traditional folk names,
miraculous chi herb is a
traditional folk name of reishi
mushroom as is herb of spiritual
potency, so is happy herb,
longevity herb...
So this is an A+ tonic, its
safety rating is gold, you just
have to watch out how fast you
go up to what dosage, there can
be some detox reactions and it's
good to look into that before
you use it.
But if I was to choose just one
herb that is nonlocal to me, it
would have to be
reishi mushroom.
When you look into the research
on this plant it really is
incredible, it almost sounds
like a snake oil because east
and west, the studies that have
been done on it are incredible
and there's so much more to
learn but its uses are so
diverse, from asthma, high blood
pressure, cholesterol, auto
immune situations, stress,
anxiety, knots in the chest, the
list goes on and on.
Definitely look further into
this herb if you are interested,
it's one of our best allies.
♪♪ Music ♪♪
So in your
study guides you will see a page
entitled greeting your green
community and really that page
is designed to help you develop
a relationship with plants
that's not just about text books
and laboratory information.
Our ancestors around the world
used various methods of just
being with the plants,
tasting it, watching it in its
environment to understand what
its qualities were going to be.
This plant here for example is
known as wormwood Artemisia.
In the spring, it's one of
the very first plants up and
traditionally around the world,
you'll see that the plants that
come up first are bitter
plants after a winter.
And so what that's really doing
is enkindling our digestive
system and helping cleanse our
body of parasites and fungus
overgrowth from the dampened
digestive system that happens
over the winter months when
we tend to be less active and
eating quite a bit
of food in general.
So, wormwood, you can learn
about it just by tasting it.
The bitter flavor if we remember
studying our elements, the
bitter flavor is
the air element.
And what that really does is
that it's kind of like blowing
on the digestive fire.
So if we think about digestive
system as a fire, this very
bitter element here, will help
that digestive system get going.
From a modern physiological
perspective what that's doing is
it's actually getting our
hydrochloric acid moving, it's
getting our bile moving, it's
getting our digestive system
going as a whole.
Traditionally, they just saw
it as a bitter and they noticed
that after they ate it, their
stomach would start gurgling.
So that's an example of how we
might learn from a plant just
from being with it.
With this same plant, we can
notice that nothing really feeds
on it.
No parasites feed on this plant,
no bugs really eat this plant so
when you taste it and you
realize that, at the same time,
it's not a big stretch to
understand that this plant in
itself would be a good remedy
for parasites and infections.
The bitter flavor we have to
remember is the vata dosha in
Ayurveda.
What that means
is that it cools.
Vata is cold and so we can use
this topically for all kinds of
things for any kind of
inflammatory condition or any
kind of infestation or
yeast or fungal overgrowth.
That would be one way of looking
at this particular plant and
then check the textbooks to make
yourself more comfortable with
that information.
Along those lines, we can
also look towards plantain, but
plantain is actually known as
white man's foot as its folk
name and plantain is said to
grow wherever the white men
went.
And part of the reason is that
we would take it with us as a
medicine.
It's a potent antibiotic and
it's an incredible healer of all
kinds of wounds and abrasions.
Plantain, if you notice, being
with it and you watch it in its
environment, not only can it
grow in very dry places like
very gravely parking lots and
dry environments, it manages to
suck the moisture out
of the ground to thrive.
So, right there you understand
that plantain has an incredible
drawing ability and the
herbalists of old understood
that about plantain and they
would use it to draw infections
out of cuts, they'd roll up
plantain leaves and stick them
in sockets of teeth to
draw out infection as well.
So there's many different ways
that it can cool and draw and
address infectious issues.
Another thing you might notice
from being with plantain is that
it goes wherever
the earth is wounded.
So if a path gets worn or a
driveway gets cleared, one of
the very first plants to
come in will be plantain.
It's much like aloe, we
don't have aloe growing in this
northern hemisphere but plantain
follows a lot of the same laws
as the aloe vera.
We can also imagine
being with a burdock.
It's a very mighty and strong,
almost intimidatingly size plant
We know now that burdock is
incredibly nutritious and it's a
desmutagen which helps to
remove toxins from the body.
But in days gone past, we would
just spend time with that plant
and we would recognize that it
is incredibly strong, it's very
good at multiplying
and it's very big.
And so if you see a person
that's depleted, you would use
the plant that's kind
of the balance of that.
You would use the plant
that brings that energy.
In the same sense, if you find
somebody that's very aggravated
you would use a chamomile plant
or a pineapple weed which often
grows around here as well.
Pineapple weed, if you
smell it, it's very sweet.
It's the opposite of big and
aggravated sort of personality.
Pineapple weed is very sweet,
very humble and very calm it's
very soft.
In that sense pineapple weed and
chamomile bring a really soft
energy to a
person who's agitated.
Or in Aryuveda, would be
called rajasic
We can also look at the smell
of a rose the same way and how
someone might use rose
essential oil or lavender.
When we look at plants in this
way, what we're doing is we're
thinking more intuitively
and more meditatively.
When we combine that with our
laboratory information
and our text books.
it's incredibly powerful and we
have to remember there's still
things yet to learn
that we may not already know and
haven't been
discovered in laboratories yet.
The rishis of ancient India, the
wise people of Europe, those are
the ways that they used to learn
about nature and learn about
plants is they would spend time
in nature which no matter what
is good for us.
And try to intuit and try
to learn about the plants.
Sometimes they would drink a
tea of that plant and feel its
effects on the body, sometimes
they would eat very little and
just take in that plant and see
if they would have a dream about
it.
All of these kinds of things are
nonlinear ways of learning about
plants because we spend a lot
of time today online, on the
internet or researching
textbooks and I think if we
really want to be fully
empowered, we need to recognize
our body and these plants have
been living together for 100s of
1,000s of years and we have a
relationship already that we
really just need to remember and
there's ways of learning about
plants that are not commonly
used today and are a bit in
jeopardy.
A lot of herbs
we know are considered weeds by
most people and so the things
that are growing on the property
like the nettles, the
burdocks, the rose hips...
are there certain
herbs that are sort of...
aside from the mushrooms that
really stand out for you that
you have a core
relationship with?
The barnyard, I call those the
barnyard herbs and fortunately
I've got a barn in my
yard so I really like them.
Those barnyard herbs are the
sustainers, the dandelions,
the burdocks, the nettles as
you say.
They grow themselves? You betcha
And those are some of the best.
I have a tea on the market
called
The Detox Tea under uncle Lee
and it literally has those.
It has the red clover, the
burdock and the
dandelion, that's all it is.
But it's a real good base note
and it's a sustainable thing.
It's cleaning our liver and
it's cleaning our wood element,
in Chinese system. Those
ones that are growing wild...
So yes, what are the best herbs?
The ones that live around you,
those are the best herbs.
So you live in boreal forest,
you've got a great resource.
♪♪ Music ♪♪
Here we are with the most
beautiful red clover.
There are many types of clover.
There's white clovers,
pink clovers we
prefer to work with the red.
The number of uses for this
plant are really incredible.
It's very high in coumarins
which  are blood cleansers,
used in many  traditional cancer
formulas  very successfully.
It's also used in menopause
formulas.
It is a phytoestrogen. It is use
to take the edge off some of
menopausal symptoms due to low
estrogen levels.
It also cleanses the liver and
gull bladder, not many people
know that we can use this
plant as an antifungal.
It's used in bronchial
conditions, irritated bronchial
nerves, you can put it in lung
formulas, for cleansing out the
lungs.
So all around we primarily use
this not just as an incredibly
nutritive plant but also for
cleansing the blood which is a
foundation in
traditional healing.
If you can keep the blood clean,
it's like keeping the river
clean.
Things don't fester, things
don't grow that are harmful for
the organism.
Red clover is this incredible
ally when it comes to cleaning
the blood, cleansing the liver
and gall bladder out, cleaning
of the lungs and addressing
serious issues such as tumors
and cancer in traditional
formulas such as the hoxsey
formula.
♪♪ Music ♪♪
So here we are
with one of the most well-known
herbs in North
America, this is Echinacea.
Echinacea has two main varieties
that not a lot of people know
about.
The one with the really
large cone top is the Echinacea
purpurea.
This is more common in Europe
and normally what's used here to
get the active constituents
we're looking for its immune
benefits, we
would use the flower.
Whereas the Echinacea
that's local to North America,
angustifolia, it's the
root that we are after.
This is an incredibly hardy
plant, it's extremely drought
resistant.
Echinacea has been used
throughout the centuries.
First nations used it for
everything from snake bites to
infections of all kinds, it's
known to be an incredible blood
cleanser.
As a tincture, it's one of the
best topical remedies for poison
ivy of anything ever studied.
It's also known as a cell
normalizer, so when it comes in
contact with abnormal cells, it
actually restores them to normal
functioning in a very
short period of time.
It's used quite commonly
for abnormal pap smears, in
suppositories, it is apparently
successful at that as well.
So angustifolia, purpurea,
Echinacea is an incredible not
only beautiful plant but
source of glychonutrients.
So anyone studying the immune
system needs to understand about
glychonutrients.
They are protein sugars
that makeup the immune system.
Consider them like an alphabet
for the immune system that wants
to...
when the immune system wants
to communicate with itself, it
needs a full alphabet.
Because our diets in these
modern times are so focused on
shelf life and convenience,
we're really not getting the
same nutrients that we normally
would from mushrooms,
from the roots, from the
berries, all the
things that our
ancestors were eating.
So really what we're looking for
in a lot of the immune boosting
herbs are these glychonutrients.
They also happen to be
high in polysaccharides.
So glychonutrients are immensely
helpful for the immune function.
So though this is one of many
plants used for increasing the
immune function, if we're going
to talk about immunity, we have
to talk about the
bigger picture.
We're talking about stress
reduction, we're talking about
exercise, we're
talking about probiotics.
Basically what most of our
system resides in our guts in
our bowels, in our stomachs.
Our stomachs are first line of
defense as is our skin and both
of those areas should be highly
populated by beneficial bacteria
that fight and protect the body.
Acidophiolus bifidus, reuteri,
lactobacillus, a whole bunch of
different types and those we
find in
traditional fermented food
our miso, our sauerkrauts.
The traditional ferments create
not only proper digestion but
also bring these beneficial
probiotics to our immune
function.
So if we're going to talk about
immunity, we can't just talk
about magic bullets like these.
♪♪ Music ♪♪
The plants are
here to help us, they provide us
with life and we are
dependent upon them.
They too are living beings that
breathe, drink, eat, feel,
and reproduce.
They offer us a chance to walk
in the sacred garden of life.
"glory"
To feel the harmonic
blessing of creation. Our place
in the web of life
and miraculous cures.
The guidance and healing we
receive when we act as both
students and stewards of nature
is more than the quality and
longevity of our own lives.
It is about the healing,
survival and evolution on all
levels.
It is also about finding our
greater role as human beings,
serving the next generation and
caring for the world within and
around us.
This is the path of the plant
lover, the wild crafter
the herbalist.
♪♪ Music ♪♪